# 11 - Achieving AI-Driven Autonomous Laboratories

Participating Offices: Office of Science-Basic Energy Science (SC-BES); SC-Advanced Scientific Computing Research (SC-ASCR); SC-Fusion Energy Sciences (SC-FES) 

Challenge: The pace of scientific discovery is fundamentally constrained by the traditional, human-driven experimental process and the availability of non-deterministic AI-driven control tools to implement complex experimental designs in combinatorially large design parameter spaces. These bottlenecks slow the cycle of hypothesis, experimentation, and discovery, leading to inefficient use of critical national assets and delaying scientific breakthroughs. Automating at least some parts of the scientific experimental scheme will both increase the volume of data produced for improved AI models and improve the repeatability of
experiments.

AI Solution: Artificial intelligence will be integrated directly into the experimental workflow and data analysis, combining robotics, edge AI, real-time analysis and intelligent feedback, hypothesis generation, and data curation/sharing.

Justification: These AI-driven laboratories will allow scientists to explore complex phenomena at an unprecedented rate and scale and are critical to achieving the Genesis Mission goals. DOE’s user facilities and long-standing national laboratories have the infrastructure, capabilities, and expertise to serve as the nucleus for innovation with this type of high throughput
discovery.

National Impact: Accelerating discovery through AI-driven laboratories will directly advance U.S. scientific leadership and economic competitiveness. This capability will speed up the development of novel materials and molecules for energy, next-generation computing, national security, and biotechnology. Like other challenges, it will also solidify the Nation's position at the forefront of AI and scientific innovation, create a new paradigm for 21st-century research, and train a future workforce fluent in the integration of AI, data science, and
experimentation

## Focus Areas for FY 2026:

C. AI-Accelerated Science: Correlation to Understanding (BES)
The power of AI could be extended beyond automated data collection and
processing, identification of correlations, and optimization of study variables to enable rapid, autonomous generation of scientific knowledge from integrated data. Key to transforming the pace of basic energy science is the high priority goal to demonstrate AI-enabled identification of phenomena or correlations in high-throughput data that are not consistent with or otherwise predicted by current scientific models and generation of a plausible new explanation as a testable hypothesis in a truly closed-loop process for advancing science. AI-assisted identification of scientific gaps and subsequent hypothesis generation would enable an optimization of the research direction and amplify the increased pace of scientific discovery possible from automation of laboratory tasks alone.